There’s lots of things to critique Gen AI for, but if we narrow the discussion to raw artistic value, I’m starting to figure out why it’s hard to love. It’s just opt-in nepotism.

From my bubble, it looks like it’s about a 80/20 split between the refusers and the apologists. The refusers have the moral high ground, but are embarrassed about appearing elitist or closed-minded. The apologists have to stay on their toes socially, they’ve ceded the ethical territory, but can soothe themselves with the idea that they’re on the right side of someone’s future. When it gets heated, the refusers get framed as gatekeepers and the apologists as cannibals. The grid lock happens quickly, each side has too much to lose by blinking first.

What I realized yesterday is that I don’t hate Gen AI apologists on moral grounds, or because I see them as Jurassic Park flavoured, accelerationists (although, clearly I have some heavy resentment). It’s rare, but I’ll admit I do see the visual value every once in a while. So my arguments against are a little unstable. The problem is, any attraction I've had to generated work is particularly short lived. I’ve seen lots of great work in the past that was tainted as soon as I figured out who made it, or how; let alone something that admits it was regurgitated instantly on command. We always want a story. We need a plausible scenario where all our hero's love us. Discovering that something we love has (at best) no more story to give you, is heartbreaking.

Finding out someone you respect is just a big someone’s son, feels the same as finding out something was just spat out of a GPU. It's not like it's irredeemable, but it's a rough first impression. They just bought their way in. The feeling you get off an apologist is, "Why don't you love me, why can't you see it's great", and the answer is, "Because you made a promise and gave me nothing. You made this for you, not for me, not for anyone else."

Even the most vapid aesthetes are human, and they'll take a good story over almost anything.